---
title: "Iceland"
date: 2022-08-26 06:00:40 -0500
categories: "thoughts"
permalink: "/iceland/"
layout: post_layout
nav_category: brain_dump
---

In the summer between undergrad and starting my PhD, I was really fortunate to get to travel including a 10 day trip to Iceland with some of my best friends from UCLA: Annie, Ash, Juan, and Param. Below is our itinerary (complete with pictures) and recommendations. Note: I procrastinated writing this until 2 months after we got back, so hopefully it's still accurate!

As a summary and favorite things:
* Iceland takes their bread very seriously, especially sourdough! I don't think we've been disappointed by any bakery or restaurant's bread!
* Icelandic people are SO friendly and welcoming! You'll have to read below to see why.
* Bathrooms are very clean and nice in Iceland, even in the gas station!

Be careful!
* Groceries in Iceland are pricier than America (but it's still cheaper than eating out). Especially eggs. A dozen of eggs was like $10
* People online recommended Icelandic hot dogs as such a big thing, and maybe we didn't go to the right place, but we tried one at Reykjavik Sausage Company and it was okay. Not bad, but personally not worth the hype.


### Rekyjavik (Days 1 & 2)

We took a red eye ($300 round trip from NYC!) into Keflavik Int'l Airport and took a bus to Reykjavik. After checking into our Airbnb, we walked around the city and saw Harpa Concert Hall, The Old Harbar, and Hallgrimskirkja. We walked mainly on the street Laugavegur, which has a lot of nice shops and restaurants and fun street art (literally art on the street) like hopscotch and racing lanes for kids. So naturally we played on them!

Favorite finds: 
* Kaolin Keramik Galleri (a pottery and handmade goods store owned by 7 local woman artists. Their work is a little expensive, but very very beautiful!)
* There are unique benches/chairs around Reykjavik!

Food recs:
* Braud & Co Bakery
* Sandholt Bakery (fantastic sourdough)
* The Coocoo's Nest (also fantastic sourdough)
* Valdi's seems to be a pretty popular ice cream place!
* Chickpea (wraps and salads, really yummy and really filling!)

**Example of really nice Icelandic people:** We went to breakfast at a small cafe called Grai kotturinn (but with some accents) and when there weren't any open tables for a party of 5, one party of three offered to move to give us space and another larger party of 5 who were near the end of the meal gave us their table!

On the second day we went to the National Museum of Iceland (where we got to dress up as old time settlers!), went to Chickpea for lunch, then enjoyed a rare sunny day at the Natholsvik Geothermal Beach. There's a geothermally heated hot tub that overflows into the ocean (so in the ocean, some parts are warm and some parts are cool) and they have a separate geothermally heated hot tub that is the most relaxing thing ever. It makes it doable to be outside in your swimsuit in 60F weather!

We also went to Laugardalslaug (a swimming pool) where all the pools are heated geothermally and they have a few hot tubs of different temperatures! I'd say it's part of the Icelandic experience (but heads up! You have to shower in a same gender locker room butt naked before entering the pool. They say it's to keep their water clean since they don't use chlorine. This swimming pool had some individual stalls, but not all of them do!)

**Example of really nice Icelandic people:** On the bus to the beach, we started chatting with a 5 year old boy (his mom translated when needed since he didn't speak much English). He told us that he was going on an adventure in the woods and then started to teach us some Icelandic! We learned how to say 'apple' and 'thank you' :). On the same bus ride, we started chatting with a PhD student from Italy and at the beach we saw her and her friends and started chatting with them! They were all from Italy or France and gave us recommendations for when we were there :)

## Now we drive around island!

We drove in a CCW direction and stayed in various Airbnb's and hostels. On average for a group of 5, I'd say that we spent ~$50 per person per night. I think with our itinerary, the maximum driving we had in one day was 6-7 hours. We definitely could've broken it up a little more, but this is was doable!

### Day 3: Pingvellir National Park, Kerid Crater, Strokkur, Gullfoss, and the Secret Lagoon

At Pingvellir National Park, you can do a snorkeling excursion to see the tectonic plates. We didn't do this because it was expensive and we didn't have enough time, but some other tourists showed us pictures, and they're gorgeous! The National Park has quite a bit of walking trails that we could've spent all day at, but we had a lot to see that day!

Kerid Crater was probably one of my favorite sights. The contrast of the red dirt an the blue water is just so mesmerizing!

Strokkur was a fun geyser to see! Think Old Faithful in Yellowstone, but much smaller and erupts much more frequently (every ~8 minutes or so). Fun to see, but watch out! It smells *very* sulfuric.

Gullfoss was absolutely breathtaking! I can't remember the last time I've seen a waterfall so big, I could spend hours just watching and listening to the rushing water. Nearby also had a little gift shop that smelled like they had the most delicious waffles ever, but turns out they were making cake. We still tried some and it was still fantastic.

We ended a long day of driving and walking with a stop at the Secret Lagoon which is essentially a massive outdoor and geothermally heated pool. It's suuuper relaxing and I definitely recommend!

We spent the night in an Airbnb in Akurey, near Hvolsvollur.


### Day 4: Seljalandsfoss & Gljufrabui, Reynisfjara (Black Sand Beach), Vik, and Fjadrarglufur Canyon

Don't worry if you can't pronounce these, I can't either :)

Seljalandsfoss is a waterfall (pro tip: foss means waterfall in Icelandic) where you can actually walk behind! It's a short walk, very worth, and you will get wet! Very close to it is Gljufrabui which is also a waterfall that you have to walk through a short canyon to get to. It's not dangerous and the path is very short, but it can be slippery!

We then drove to Reynisfjara which is a black sand beach (from volcano rock). It was really peaceful to walk around and even take a nap on!

After the beach, we drove through the town of Vik. It's really small and we only stopped for lunch at <span class="standOut">Black Crust Pizzeria</span> (definitely try the date and cream cheese one!) but we were also recommended <span class="standOut">The Soup Company</span> by some friends.

After lunch, we were driving and came across the most beautiful flower field! The most vibrant purple flowers extended as far as the eye could see and we just had to stop to enjoy it :)

Next was Fjadrarglufer Canyon, which is where Justin Bieber shot part of his music video for "I'll Show You". In his video, he has some other locations that we went to which was cool to see! The canyon is absolutely breathtaking and nearby are fantastic hills for rolling and living out your childhood/Sound of Music dreams.

Lastly, we were going to Svartifoss, but the hike was kind of long and we had seen many waterfalls, so instead we hiked towards the glacier in Vatnajokull National Park. Without proper equipment and knowledge of what you're doing, you can't go onto the glacier, but we got pretty darn close! You could actually feel the cold coming from the ice (ask Ash, he was wearing shorts).

We stayed in a tiny little hostel called Vagnsstadir HI Hostel where we had the tiniest little cabin to ourselves.

### Day 5: Diamond Beach, Hofn, an unexpected surprise, and Litlanifoss & Hengifoss

We actually drove past Diamond Beach and the Iceberg Lagoon yesterday, but we actually stopped there today to check it out. It's really beautiful an sad at the same time to see the icebergs in the water. The pieces of ice that get washed ashore are so clear and walking around the beach felt like we were in an ice sculpture gallery.

Then we went to Hofn where we got lunch at <span class="standOut">Pakkhus</span> which was recommended by my mom's friend for their lobster. The lobster was phenomenal, but we especially loved their bread. It wasn't sourdough, but it was so so fresh that I think we asked for more bread at least five times...they were really nice about it!

Okay and here's the unexpected surprise: <span class="standOut">bouncies</span>. All around Iceland, they've started building these giant air filled tarps that are essentially giant trampolines for kids to jump on. We drove by and saw a kid doing a flip and we knew we had to stop!! Thus, the inner kid in each of us patiently waited until the young kids (ages 3-8 or so) were done jumping and then we eagerly tried it out. It's a TON of fun AND (example of Icelandic people being really nice) the parents let their kids play with us! They had so much fun, when it was time for us to head out, the little boys would steal our shoes and jackets so we wouldn't go!

After taking a jumpy break, we went to two more waterfalls: Litlanifoss and Hengifoss. These two were tall, but not wide and the hike to them was quite steep! As with any waterfall in Iceland, breathtaking!

We ended by staying in an Airbnb in Neskaupstadur.

### Day 6: Studlagil, Dettifoss, Godafoss, and Akureyri

We got lucky with weather until day 6. This day, it was raining and then downpoured, but we made the best of the situation!

Studlagil is a canyon where you can see some amazing lava cooling formations. It was cold and windy, so we didn't spend too much time here, but would've loved to enjoy it more on a warmer and drier day!

Dettifoss is a beautiful waterfall, but the fact that we were walking 1 km there and 1 km back to the car in a torrential downpour made it a bit less enjoyable. The path was flooding so much that the national park employees had to reroute tourists on a detour. By the time we got back to the car, every inch was soaked and it felt like we just jumped into the ocean.

Luckily, Godafoss was a little lighter on the rain and a much shorter walk! Also very beautiful :)

And our last stop for the day was Akureyri, a city in northern Iceland. I thought this was the cutest thing, but the red light in all the traffic lights here are shaped in a heart!! How precious is that :') In Akureyri, we ate dinner at <span class="standOut">Indian Curry House</span> and picked up lunch for the next day from <span class="standOut">Kurdo Kebabs</span>. Both were fantastic!

We retired for the night at an Airbnb in Grenivik, about 30 minutes from Akureyri where there was an outdoor hot tub and a beautiful view of the snow capped mountains! The host also has a dog and a few horses that we got to see.

### Day 7: Horseback Riding, Laufas Museum, back to Akureyri, Hvitserkur, and Grabrok

### Day 8: Londrangar, Vatnshellir, Stone Bridge, Raudfeldsgja (Canyon), Kirkjufellsfoss, Olkelda, Deildartunguhver, Hraunfossar, and back to Reykjavik

### Day 9: Fagradalsfjall Volcano, Kopar

### Day 10: Fly home!
